Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to add validation to our model.
Let's jump right into the action.
So right now I'm in our user controller, James File.
And in our previous lesson, we created an object.
We named it lowercase user, which is being created from our uppercase user blueprint or model, and
then still within our controller.
Once we've created that object, we are then calling its register method.
So our goal in this lesson is to make that register method actually do something right.
That's where we want to enforce our business logic that none of these three fields are allowed to be
blank.
And we also need to make sure that the value for each one makes sense.
So let's get started right now.
Do this with me in your text editor.
Jump in to our user JSC model file.
Towards the end of our previous lesson, we created this empty function named Register.
And right now, within the body of this function, let's add a few comments just to give ourselves a
few big picture goals of where we're going.
So let's add one comment and say, step number one, validate user data.
This is where we can check to make sure that none of the fields are empty and also that the values make
sense.
And then below this, let's add another comment and say step number two, only if there are no validation
errors.
And then you could keep typing all on one line.
But I'm going to drop down just so you can see this all on the screen at once.
But let's say only if there are no validation errors, then save the user data into a database.
Right.
That's the end goal of a user registry.
We want to permanently store their user name, email and password so that we can reference it when that
user tries to log in again in the future.
Now, in this particular lesson, we are not going to connect to a database yet.
In this lesson, we are going to spend our time focusing on step number one.
Right, validating the user's data.
Now, we could start spelling out our code right underneath this comment here, but instead let's create
a separate function to stay organized.
So maybe right above this register function line, let's add a brand new line and let's say user dot,
prototype, dot, validate, and let's set that to equal an anonymous functions, function, parentheses,
curly brackets.
OK, then down within our register function right underneath that step number one line.
Let's just call that new validate function so we can just say this dot and then call validate.
If you're confused by the this keyword, that's OK.
Here's a quick review.
We know that the this keyword points towards whatever is calling or executing the current function.
So in this case, the current function is our register function.
So what's causing that?
Well, if we jump back to our user controller, it's our lowercase user object that is calling the register
method.
So that lowercase user object is what the this keyword is going to be pointing towards.
So then when we say this dot validate, it's almost like we're just saying lowercase user dot validate.
And because we added a validate function to our uppercase user blueprint, we know that that lowercase
user object will have access to this method.
OK, now within this validate function, there are a million different ways that we could validate the
data.
There's no right or wrong way.
I'm just going to show you the way that I would do it.
I'm going to list out several if statements of problems with the data that I would want to look out
for.
So, for example, I will say if and then list my condition inside these parentheses and then curly
brackets where I say what should happen if this condition is true?
So let's say if they left their username field blank, right.
If they leave this username field blank, that is a big problem.
So let's say this within our condition, within these parentheses, let's say if this DOT data dot username,
if that equals just an empty pair of quotes, not even a space in between them, just nothing.
Just two quotations.
If they left that username feel completely blank, then what do we want to do within these curly brackets?
Well, again, there are a million different ways you could set this up.
But here's what I'm going to do up at the very top of this file within our constructor function below
this this data equals data line.
Let's say this DOT errors equals an empty array.
So just an opening and closing square brackets.
So what I like to do is I check for a potential problem, and if this is true, if they left that field
blank within the curly brackets, I'm going to push a new item onto our errors array.
So within these curly brackets, let's say this dot errors, dot push and push is an array method.
So parentheses to call it.
And let's give it a string of text and say you must provide a username.
OK, but what if they leave the email or password fields completely blank.
Well, let's just copy this line of code into our clipboard, so copy that.
And then right below this line of code, just paste it in, just duplicate it and then let's just change
this data username, change the username to email.
And then in the message that we are pushing on to the array, let's say you must provide a valid email
address.
Let's not forget about the password, so below that line, paste in your clipboard again, this time
let's change this data username to this DataDot password.
If that is left blank, then let's just change this to say you must provide a password.
Now, there are still several other conditions that I would want to check for.
For example, I'd still want to make sure that their password is at least 12 characters long for security.
I'd want to make sure that whatever they typed for their email contains the at symbol.
Right.
That it looks like a valid email address.
I'd want to make sure that their username doesn't contain any weird characters, so on and so forth.
So we're not done here yet.
There are additional things that we would want to check for within our validate function.
But for the time being, let's go ahead and test this out.
We can already leverage this from within our controller.
So let's go ahead and save this model file and then jump back into our user controller JS file.
Now, right after we say lower case user dot register right below that, let's get rid of this line
where we send back a generic response that says thanks for trying to register and instead let's include
if statement, if parentheses, curly brackets, let's drop down within the curly brackets.
And then after the closing curly bracket, let's also say else, and then a new pair of curly brackets.
OK, and what are we checking for with this if statement?
Well, within the parentheses for our condition.
Let's say if lowercase user dot errors dot lank remember our errors property is an array and in JavaScript
every array has a property name length that counts how many items are in that array.
So that array starts out as an empty array.
So the only way that this value would be anything larger than zero is if there actually is a problem
or an error.
Now, when it comes to conditions within an IF statement, any number larger than zero evaluates to
true.
So just as a test, let's do this.
If there are indeed validation errors, let's just send them back to the user.
So let's just say response dot send and let's just send back that array of errors.
So user dot errors, OK, and then else otherwise if there are no validation errors, just as a test,
let's send back to the user.
So response send and let's just include a string of text says congrats.
There are no errors now.
In the future we will learn how to set things up so that our controller does not even need to have this
basic logic of checking the air zarei.
Ideally, from an MVC perspective, even that sort of logic should be left to the model, not the controller.
But for the time being, this setup will work just fine.
So let's go ahead and save this file and then take it for a test drive.
So in the browser, imagine I fill in my username and password, but leave the email field blank.
So I say username Brad, leave email blank, but then fill in a password and then submit the form.
Perfect.
We see you must provide a valid email address.
Or if I go back and leave all of the fields blank and submit the form, we see all of the messages.
You must provide a username, you must provide a valid email, you must provide a password.
Or if I go back and don't leave any of the fields blank, we see.
Congrats.
There are no errors now.
Obviously sending back just plain simple text like this instead of a styled HTML template to match the
design of our site is not the pinnacle of user experience, but we'll get to that later.
For now, let's keep working on our validation rules.
So let's jump back into our editor, jump back into our user model file and within our validate function,
let's add a check to make sure that the password is at least twelve characters long for security reasons.
So let's say if parentheses curly brackets for the condition inside the parentheses, we can say if
this dot data dot password and in JavaScript you can see how many characters a string consists of by
looking for its length.
Property said the selected code will pull in.
How many characters long it is and let's say if that is greater than zero.
Right.
If they typed in something because we want this to be a distinct message from just the generic, you
must provide a password if it's left completely blank.
So we'll say if the length of what they typed in is greater than zero and.
So ampersand, ampersand and its length is less than 12, so this data, not password length, is less
than 12 anyways within the curly brackets.
If this is the case, let's just say this dot errors, dot push and let's just push on a string of text
that says password must be at least 12 characters.
And then below that line of code, let's set something up so that their password cannot exceed 100 characters.
From a security standpoint, the longer the password, the better.
So we could even set the upward limit to something like two hundred or five hundred.
But let's just say if parentheses curly brackets, let's say if this data dot password dot lane is greater
than, let's say, one hundred, well then in the curly brackets we would push on an error message.
So this dot errors and then call the push method and give it a string of text.
Password cannot exceed 100 characters.
OK, so we just checked for the minimum and maximum length of the password.
Now let's do the same thing for the length of the username.
We can save a lot of typing by just copying and pasting and duplicating those last two lines.
So I'm just going to copy that and then right below that paste in my clipboard and then on these bottom
two lines, just change the reference to password to the username, do the same thing on the last line
as well.
And on this first user name line, let's say if the user name is greater than zero characters, but
less than instead of 12, let's just say three, your username needs to be at least three characters
long.
These are all just arbitrary rules that I'm making up.
But you get the idea right below this value of three.
Make sure that we change password here to username.
And then be sure to customize the error message, so instead of saying password must be at least 12
characters, it should say user name must be at least three characters.
OK, and then for this last line, let's say that the maximum username length should be 30 characters.
So instead of a hundred, let's change that to 30.
And then for the custom error message, let's just say user name cannot exceed 30 characters.
Now let's move on and check to make sure that whatever the user types for their e-mail is a valid email
address, meaning it should have a beginning portion and then the ACT symbol and then some sort of domain.
Now we could write out the code that would check for that by learning about something called a regular
expression.
But I don't think this is the time or place for that.
Instead, I recommend we go out to the JavaScript grocery store or NPM and pick up a package that has
a bunch of useful validator checks and one of them happens to be an email validator check.
Let me show you what I mean.
So right now, be sure to open up your command line and I'm going to press control, see to quit the
current app and let's install a package from NPM.
So let's run this command together.
NPM install.
And the name of the package is Validator.
Go ahead and type that command in and then let's press enter.
OK, with that package installed, I'm going to go ahead and start my application up again.
So to do that, it's NPM run watch.
OK, and now up at the very top of our user model file, let's require or import in that package that
we just downloaded.
So let's create a constant let's call it validator and let's set it to equal and then just require in
that package.
OK, now we can leverage validator.
So within our validate function, the second rule is for our email.
Right, we said if the email is left blank, well, let's just change this logic, let's empty out the
parentheses for that condition.
So it's just an empty pair of parentheses.
And instead, let's write this.
If Validator DOT is email and is email is a method, so it gets its own set of parentheses to call it.
And now whatever we pass within the is email parentheses, this is email method is going to return either
true or false.
So within those parentheses, let's pass at the email that the user just submitted.
So that would be this dot data, dot email.
OK, and now if what they typed is a valid email address, this is going to return.
True.
But we only want to push this error if what they typed is not a valid email.
So to check for the opposite right before validator, we can just include an exclamation mark.
In this case, the exclamation sort of reverses whatever comes after it.
So if it was true before, now it's false.
If it was false before, now it's true.
So altogether we're saying if what they typed in is not an email, then push this error.
Let's go ahead and save this and test it out.
I'll say, Brad, for my username, for email.
Just say, Brad, clearly that's not a valid email address for password.
I'll choose something that's over 12 characters and then try to sign up cuz we see you must provide
a valid email address.
But if I go back and say Brad at Brad dot com, that should be considered a valid email address.
Let's test it out.
Cool.
Congrats.
There are no errors.
OK, and let's add one more validation check.
Let's make sure that whatever they choose for a username does not contain any weird characters or symbols.
Let's set it so you can only choose from the 26 letters of the alphabet and then numbers like zero through
nine.
So to check for this, back in our text editor, maybe right above that email line that we just wrote.
Let's add a new line and let's say if parentheses curly brackets for the condition, let's make sure
that they typed something in for the username.
So let's say if this data username does not equal an empty pair of quotes, so instead of double equals,
sign the check for equality.
We can say exclamation equals sign to check for the opposite of equality.
And then still within that same set of parentheses, let's say, and and so ampersand, ampersand,
if they typed something in and and then validator dot is alpha numeric and that's a method.
So it gets its own set of parentheses.
So within those parentheses, let's passing this dot data dot username.
Now this is going to return.
True.
If it is alphanumeric, we would want to check for the opposite of that.
So right before validator just include an exclamation then within these curly brackets, let's push
on an error.
So this dot errors dot push, then those parentheses, let's say user name can only contain letters
and numbers.
Let's go ahead and save this and test it out.
So if I say Brad and then I include some curly brackets or square brackets and then let me fill in the
other fields.
Cool, we see username can only contain letters and numbers, but if I just choose from the letters
of the alphabet and maybe even a few numbers.
Awesome, we see congrats, there are no errors, and that's going to bring this lesson to a close in
our next lesson, we're going to make sure that the visitor doesn't try to send a value that is not
a string of text for one of these properties.
For example, we would not want to accept an array or an object.
We only want strings of text.
And we also want to make sure that we do not accept any extra properties or feels that a visitor might
try and send over.
Setting these safety checks up should be very, very quick.
And then after that we can finally work on actually saving the user data into a database.
Let's keep things rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.